I'm using four pounds of stoneware clay.
I attach the clay to the bat, and then I center
the clay.
So after I center the clay, I open up.
Once the clay is opened up, I start bringing
up the walls with equal pressure
inside hand/outside hand at about 3 or 4 o'clock.
I deliberately leave the walls of the form
thick knowing that I'm going to be pushing
it out, to make the form from a cylinder into
a rounded shape.
After I pull the form up, I next smooth it
with a rubber rib.
And then I use a tool called a Steve tool
that creates vertical texture.
Next I apply sodium silicate with
a brush.
To get the sodium silicate hard on the form,
I use a heat gun.
After the sodium silicate is dry and firm,
I can no longer use any water on the outside
of the form.
The shaping of the form comes all from pressure
with my inside hand pushing out.
It takes several attempts to push it from
the top down, bulging it out until I get the
cracks to form and I achieve the profile
that I want.
The cracking follows the lines that were made
by the Steve tool.
After the lip is refined I use a needle tool
to trim it evenly and then I round it out.
I cut a section of the bottom off to get the
profile more graceful.
When the pot is competed, I take a wire tool
and I cut it, removing it from the bat.